In this video, we'll put the master
method to use by instantiating it for
six different examples.
But first,
let's recall what the master method says.
So the master method takes as input
recurrences of a particular format,
in particular recurrences that
are parameterized by three
different constants, A, B and D.
A refers to the number of recursive calls,
or
the number of subproblems that get solved.
B is the factor by which the subproblem
size is smaller than the original
problem size.
And D is the exponent and
the running time of the work done
outside of the recursive calls.
So the recurrence has the form,
T(n), the running time on the input
of size n, is no more than A,
the number of subproblems, times the time
required to solve each subproblem.
Which is T(n/b) because the input
size of a subproblem is n/b.
Plus O(n to the d).
The work outside of the recursive calls.
There's also a base case
which I haven't written down.
So once the problem size drops
below a particular constant
then there should be no more recursion and
you can just solve the problem
immediately that is in constant time.
Now given a recurrence in this permitted
format, the running time is given by one
of three formulas depending on
the relationship between a,
the number of recursive calls,
and b raised to the d power.
Case one of the master method is when
these two quantities are the same,
a = b to the d.
Then the running time is n to the d log n,
no more than that.
In case 2, the number of recursive calls,
a, is strictly smaller than b to the d.
Then we get a better running time
upperbound of O(n to the d).
And when a is bigger than b to the d,
we get this somewhat funky looking
running time of O(n raised to
the log base b of a power).
We will understand where that
formula comes from a little later.
So that's the master method.
It's a little hard to interpret
the first time you see it.
So let's look at some concrete examples.
Let's begin with an algorithm that
we already know the answer to,
we already know the running time.
Namely let's look at merge sort.
So again what's so great about the master
method is all we have to do is identify
the values of the three relevant
parameters A, B, and D, and we're done.
We just plug them in and
we get the answer.
So a remembers the number
of recursive calls.
So in merge sort,
recall we get two recursive calls.
b is the factor by which the sub problem
size is smaller than that in the original.
Well we recurse on half the array.
So the subproblem size is
half that of the original.
So b = 2.
And recall that outside of the recursive
calls, all merge sort does is merge.
And that's a linear time subroutine.
So the exponent D is 1, a reflection
of the fact that it's linear time.
So remember the key trigger which
determines which of the three cases is
the relationship between a and b to the d.
So a obviously is 2.
And b to the d = 2.
So this puts us in Case 1.
And remember in Case 1 we
have that the running time is
bounded above by O(n to the d (logn).
In our case d = 1.
So this is just O(n log n).
Which, of course, we already knew.
But at least this is a sanity check,
the master method is at least reconfirming
facts which we've already
proven by direct means.
So let's look at a second example.
The second example is going to be for the
binary search algorithm in a sorted array.
Now we haven't talked explicitly about
binary search and I'm not planning to, so
if you don't know what binary search is,
please read about it in a textbook or
just look it up on the web, and
it'll be easy to find descriptions.
But the upshot it,
this is basically how you'd look
up a phone number in a phone book.
Now I realize probably
the youngest viewers of this video
haven't actually had the experience
of using a physical telephone book.
But for the rest of you, as you know.
You don't actually start with the As and
then go to the Bs, and
then go to the Cs if you're looking for
a given name.
You more sensibly split the telephone
book roughly in the middle and
depending if what you're looking for
is early or later in the alphabet,
you effectively recurse on the relevant
half of the telephone book.
So binary search is just exactly the same
algorithm when you are looking for
a given element in
a particular sorted array.
You start in the middle of the array,
and then you recurse on the left or
the right half as appropriate depending
on if the element you're looking for
is bigger or less than the middle element.
Now the master method applies
equally well to binary search and
it tells us what its running time is.
So in the next quiz you'll
go through that exercise.
So the correct answer is the first one.
To see why let's recall what a,
b, and d mean.
a is the number of recursive calls.
Now in binary search you only
make one recursive call.
This is unlike merge sort.
Remember you just compare the element
you're looking for to the middle element.
If it's less than the middle element
you recurse on the left half.
If it's bigger than the middle element,
you recurse on the right half.
So in any case there's only one recursive
call, so a is merely 1 in binary search.
Now in any case you recurse
on half the array so
like in merge sort the value of b = 2,
you recurse on a problem of half the size.
And outside of the recursive column,
the only thing you do is one comparison.
You just determine whether the element
you're looking for is bigger than or
less than the middle element of
the array that you recursed on.
So that's constant time outside
the recursive call giving us a value for
d of 0.
Just like merge sort, this is again
Case 1 of the master method because we
have a = b to the d,
both in this case are equal to one.
So this gives us a recurrence,
a solution to our recurrence
of big O(n to the d log n).
Since d = 0 this is simply log n.
And again many of you probably already
know that the running time of binary
search is log n or
you can figure that out easily.
Again this is just using the master
method as a sanity check
to reconfirm that it's giving
us the answers that we expect.
Let's now move on to some harder examples,
beginning with the first recursive
algorithm for integer multiplication.
Remember this is where we recurse on
four different products of n over two
digit numbers and then re-combine them in
the obvious way using adding by zero and
some linear time additions.
In the first integer multiplication
algorithm, which, does not make use of
Gauss's Trick where we do the four
different recursive calls in a naive way,
we have a,
the number of recursive calls, = 4.
Now in each case, whenever we take
a product of two smaller numbers,
the numbers have n over two digits so
that's half as many digits
as we started with.
So just like in the previous two examples,
b = 2.
The input size drops by
a factor 2 when we recurse.
Now how much work do we do
outside of the recursive call?
Well again all it is doing is
additions and adding by zeros and
that can be done in linear time.
Linear time corresponds to
a primer value of d = 1.
So next we determine which case
of the master method we're in.
a = 4, b to the d = 2,
which in this case is less than a.
So this corresponds to Case
3 of the master method.
This is where we get
the somewhat strange formula for
the running time of the recurrence.
T(n) = O(n to the log base b of a).
Which with our parameter values,
is n to the log base 2(4).
Also known as O(n squared).
So let's compare this to
the simple algorithm that
we all learned back in grade school.
Recall that the iterative algorithm for
multiplying two integers also takes
an n squared number of operations.
So this was a clever idea to
attack the problem recursively.
But at least in the absence of Gauss's
Trick where you just naively compute each
of the four necessary products separately.
You do not get any improvement
over the iterative algorithm that
you learned in grade school.
Either way,
it's an n squared number of operations.
But what if we do make
use of Gauss's Trick,
where we do only three recursive
calls instead of four?
Surely the running time won't
be any worse than n squared, and
hopefully it's going to be better.
So I'll let you work out
the details on this next quiz.
So the correct answer to this
quiz is the fourth option.
It's not hard to see what the relevant
values of a, b, and d are.
Remember the whole point of Gauss's trick
is to reduce the number of recursive
calls from four down to three so
the value of a is going to be 3.
As usual we're recursing on a problem size
which is half of that of the original.
In this case n over two digit numbers so
b remains 2.
And just like in the more
naive recursive algorithm,
we only do linear work outside
of the recursive call.
So all that's needed to do some
additions and patterns by 0.
So that puts this parameter values a,
b, and d.
Then we have to figure out which
case of the Master Method that is.
So we have a = 3, b raised to the d = 2.
So a has dropped by 1 relative
to the more naive algorithm.
But we're still in Case
3 of the Master Method.
a is still bigger that the b to the d.
So the running time is governed by
that rather exotic looking formula.
Namely T(n) = O(n to the log base b),
which in our case is 2(a).
Which is now 3 instead of 4, okay?
So the master method just tells us
the solution to this recurrence of 3.
So what is log of the,
what is log base 2(3)?
Well plug it in your computer or
your calculator, and
you'll find that it's roughly 1.59.
So we've got a running
time of n to the 1.59.
Which is certainly better than n squared.
It's not as fast as n log n,
not as fast as the merge sort recurrence,
which makes only two workers for calls.
But it's quite a bit
better than quadratic.
So summarizing, you did in fact
learn a suboptimal algorithm for
integer multiplication
way back in grade school.
You can beat the iterative algorithm
using a combination of recursion
plus Gauss's trick to save on
the number of recursive calls.
Let's quickly move on to
our final two examples.
Example number five is for those of you
that watched the video on Strassen's
matrix multiplication algorithm.
So recall the salient properties
of Strassen's algorithm.
The key idea is similar to Gauss's Trick
for integer multiplication.
First you set up the problem recursively,
one observes that the naive way to solve
a problem recursively would
lead to eight subproblems.
But if you're clever about
saving some computations,
you can get it down to just seven
recursive calls, seven subproblems.
So a, in Strassen's argument,
is equal to 7.
As usual, each subproblem size is
half that of the original one.
So b = 2.
And the amount of work done
outside of the recursive calls is
linear in the matrix size.
So quadratic in the end,
quadratic in the dimension
because there's a quadratic number of
entries in terms of the dimension.
So n squared work outside the recursive
call is leaving you a value of d = 2.
So as far as which case of
the master method we're in.
Well it's the same as in
the last couple of examples.
a = 7,
b to the d = 4 which is less than a.
So once again we're in Case 3 and
now the running
time of Strassen's algorithm
T(n) = O(n to the log
base) 2(7) which is more or
less n to the 2.81.
And again this is a win.
Once we use the savings to get
down to just 7 recursive calls.
This beats the naive federate algorithm,
which recall would require cubic time.
So that's another win for
clever divide and
conquer in matrix multiplication
via Strassen's algorithm.
And once again, the master's method
just by plugging in parameters,
tells us exactly what the right
answer to this recurrence is.
So for the final example I feel
a little guilty because I've shown
you five examples and
none of the them have triggered Case 2.
We've had two in Case 1 in the master
method and three now in Case 3.
So this will be a fictitious
recurrence just to illustrate Case 2.
But there are examples of recurrences that
come up where Case 2 is the relevant one.
So let's just look at
the following recurrence.
So this recurrence is
just like merge sort.
We recurse twice.
There's two recursive calls
each on half the problem size.
The only difference is in
this recurrence we're working
a little bit harder on the combined step.
Instead of linear time outside of the
recursive calls we're doing a quadratic
amount of work.
Okay so a = 2.
b = 2 and d = 2.
So b to the d = 4, strictly bigger than a.
And that's exactly the trigger for Case 2.
Now recall what the running
time is in Case 2.
It's simply n to the d, where d is
the exponent in the combined step.
In our case, d is 2, so
we get a running time of n squared.
And you might find this a little
counter-intuitive, right?
Given that merge sort.
All we do with merge sort is change
the combine step from linear to quadratic.
And merge sort has
a running time of n log n.
You might have expected the running
time here to be n squared log n.
But that would be an over estimate, so
the master method gives us a tighter upper
bound, shows that it's
only quadratic work.
So put differently, the running time
of the entire algorithm is governed
by the work outside of
the recursive calls.
Just in the outer most
call to the algorithm,
just at the root of the recursion tree